# Lake Mead Water Conservation Program Analysis (Intentionally Created Surplus; ICS)
## Successes, Challenges, and Potential Improvements post 2026

This folder generates four plots to support the Lake Mead Water Conservation Program Analysis. Within the Colorado River basin, the Lake Mead water conservation program is called Intentionally Created Surplus (ICS) program for Lake Mead. This program is defined in the 2007 Interim Guidelines and 2019 Drought Contingency Plans (Reclamation, 2007; 2019).

Figure 1. - Water Conservation Account balances over time.
Figure 2. - Water Conservation Account deposits and debits over time.
Figure 3. - Lake Mead storage and storage estimated if water conservation program did not exist.
Figure 4. - Lake Mead inflow, evaporation, available water, and program deposits for which their was sufficient available water.
Note - Available Water = Inflow - Evaporation.

## View Results
Open the file **LakeMeadWaterConservationProgramAnalysis.pdf**

## Requirements to Run
* R version 4.1.1. Download from https://cran.r-project.org/.
* R Studio 1.1.456. Download from https://www.rstudio.com/.

## Directions to Generate Results
1. Download and install R and RStudio (see requirements)
1. Within this subfolder, open the **LakeMeadWaterConservationProgramAnalysis.Rproject** file. R Studio should open.
1. Select the **LakeMeadWaterConservationProgramAnalysis.Rmd** tab (R markdown file) within R Studio.
1. Just below the tab, click the **Knit** button.
1. The code will run and generate the file **LakeMeadWaterConservationProgramAnalysis.pdf**. Open the pdf file to view results.

## Explanation of Contents
1. **LakeMeadWaterConservationProgramAnalysis.pdf** - PDF file with description of methods and all plots. Generated by the **LakeMeadWaterConservationProgramAnalysis.Rmd** file.
1. **LakeMeadWaterConservationProgramAnalysis.R** - R file with script to generate results in the R studio console. Some differences from **LakeMeadWaterConservationProgramAnalysis.Rmd**
1. **LakeMeadWaterConservationProgramAnalysis.Rmd** - R mark down file with script to generate results in **ICS-Plots.pdf** file.
1. **IntentionallyCreatedSurplusSummary.xlsx** - Excel file with ICS account balance, withdraws, and limits data summarized from Reclamation reports (Reclamation 2024).
1. **MeadDroughtContingencyPlan.xlsx** - Excel file with storage-area-elevation curve for Lake Mead and schedule of Lower Basin drought contingency plan mandatory water conservation targets by elevation tier.
1. **MeadLevel.xlsx** - Lake Mead level data cross tabulated by Year (1935 to present) and Month.
1. **dfICSBalanceMelt.csv** - Comma separated values file of water conservation program account balances read in from the IntentionallyCreatedSurplusSummary.xlsx file. Used for reproducibility and in other programming efforts that require ICS data.
1. **dfICSDeposit.csv** - Comma separated values file of water conservation program account deposits and withdraws (wide version) read in from the IntentionallyCreatedSurplusSummary.xlsx file. Used for reproducibility and in other programming efforts that require ICS data.
1. **dfICSBalanceDepositMelt.csv** - Comma separated values file of water conservation program account deposits and withdraws (narrow version) read in from the IntentionallyCreatedSurplusSummary.xlsx file. Used for reproducibility and in other programming efforts that require ICS data.

## Requested Citation
David E. Rosenberg (2024), “Lake Mead Water Conservation Program Analysis.” Utah
State University. Logan, Utah. https://github.com/dzeke/ColoradoRiverCollaborate/tree/main/LakeMeadWaterConservationProgramAnalysis.
## References
1. USBR. (2019). "Agreement Concerning Colorado River Drought Contingency Management and Operations." U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Washington, DC. https://www.usbr.gov/dcp/finaldocs.html
1. USBR. (2007). "Record of Decision: Colorado River Interim Guidelines for Lower Basin Shortages and Coordinated Operations for Lakes Powell and Mead." U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. https://www.usbr.gov/lc/region/programs/strategies/RecordofDecision.pdf.
1. USBR (2024). "Boulder Canyon Operations Office - Program and Activities: Water Accounting Reports". https://www.usbr.gov/lc/region/g4000/wtracct.
html. These annual reports are aggregated in the Excel file **IntentionallyCreatedSurplus-Summary.xlsx**.